---
speaker: Maurício Hippert
affiliation: Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro
title: "Bulk viscosity far from equilibrium in neutron star mergers"
type: seminar
datestr: "Quinta-feira, 12 de setembro de 2025"
time: "15:00 – 16:00"
place: IF-UFRJ, prédio novo, sala 148 
---

We investigate the weak-interaction-driven bulk-viscous transport properties of npe matter in the neutrino transparent regime. Previous works assumed that the induced bulk viscosity correction to pressure, near beta equilibrium, is linear in deviations from the equilibrium charge fraction. We show that this is not always true for (some) realistic equations of state at densities between one and three times saturation density. This nonlinear nature of the perturbation around equilibrium motivates a far-from-beta-equilibrium description of bulk-viscous transport in neutron star mergers, which can be precisely achieved using a new Israel-Stewart formulation with resummed bulk and relaxation time transport coefficients. The computation of these transport coefficients depends on out-of-beta-equilibrium pressure corrections, which can be computed for a given equation of state. We calculate these coefficients for equations of state that satisfy the latest constraints from multimessenger observations from LIGO/Virgo and NICER detectors. We show that varying the nuclear symmetry energy 
J
 and its slope 
L
 can significantly affect the transport coefficients and the nonlinear behavior of the out-of-equilibrium pressure corrections. Therefore, having better constraints on 
J
 and 
L
 will directly impact our understanding of bulk-viscous processes in neutron star mergers.
